Query Tuning beta docs (#298)
pganalyze/pganalyze-docs: query-tuning/index.mdx

---
title: 'Query Tuning'
backlink_href: /docs
backlink_title: 'Documentation'
---

import DocsBetaFeature from '../components/DocsBetaFeature'

<DocsBetaFeature feature="Query Tuning" />

## Getting Started

Query Tuning provides a unified interface and workflow for optimizing slow Postgres queries.

> The Query Tuning Workbooks feature lets you streamline recording of related `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`
> outputs and enables easy, secure sharing them with your team. Each workbook contains a
> baseline query and one or more variants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Query Tuning Workbooks feature lets you organize related `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`
outputs and share them easily and securely with your team. Each workbook contains a
baseline query documenting a query's current performance, and one or more variants.
```

> Variants are a modification to the original query that aims to optimize it by changing planner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variants are modifications to the original query that aim to optimize it by changing planner
```
or
```suggestion
A variant is a modification to the original query that aims to optimize it by changing planner
```

settings, adding a `pg_hint_plan` hint, or rewriting the query. You can compare and analyze
variants with clear visibility into changes and their effects on performance.

> The parameter sets feature makes it easy to test performance for different bind parameter values
> across the baseline and variants, making sure that optimizing for one user's experience does not
> slow down other cases.

Reviewer: I think it may not be obvious to everyone that parameters can affect performance, so we may want to lead with that:
```suggestion
Different parameter values (or different constant values) can lead to varying performance or even a different plan for a specific query.
The parameter sets feature makes it easy to test performance for different bind parameter values
across the baseline and variants, making sure that optimizing for one user's experience does not
slow down other cases.
```

Query Tuning workbooks automatically convert positional parameters to named parameters, e.g. turning
`user_id = $1` into `user_id = $user_id`. This makes it easy to test rewrites of a query, or test
individual portions of a query.

> ### Query Tuning Features

Reviewer: This feels a bit more like marketing than like documentation. I can see why we want to list it, but it kind of seems out of place here...

Author: Yeah, this was from the original docs draft and I also had that feedback then - let me see if I can cut it down / rephrase / remove.

Author: I've decided to take most of this out since it was actually duplicative of the prior section, with the exception of plan comparison, which I've edited into the above text.

* Manage and run parameter sets across many query variants, either sourced from query
  samples or by creating parameter sets manually.
* Highlight performance differences across variants and parameter sets, allowing you to
  see at a glance whether a query rewrite or other changes are making things better or worse.
* View key metrics such as cost estimates, runtime, I/O read time, row estimates, and index scans
  in a clear overview, helping you form a hypothesis about what to try.
* Compare Plans: You can run a diff between two query plans, helping you visualize and compare
  execution plans side-by-side. This feature helps debug whether differences in performance
  are due to plan shape or environmental factors like I/O time or row estimates. 

## How to enable Query Tuning

### New role and permissions

Query Tuning utilizes a separate user permission, called “Tune Queries”. Only users with
Admin roles will get this permission assigned automatically. This permission allows
users to create workbooks and to use all associated Query Tuning features.

Users without the permission are able to view existing workbooks, including parameter

> information, but cannot create new workbooks, variants, or record new plans.

Reviewer 2: what is "record new plans"?

Author: Basically that they can't upload plans. I'll reword to "use the collector workflow", since that's the main thing that matters.

Query Tuning streamlines the process of gathering query plans through both automatic and
manual workflows. While you can always upload EXPLAIN ANALYZE plans manually, the collector
can now run EXPLAIN queries automatically for you, saving time and effort. To use this
automated feature, ensure you're running collector version 0.64.0 or later and follow our
[documentation for setting up the collector workflow](collector-workflow).

If you prefer not to use the automatic collection, you can continue using the manual workflow.

Both automatic and manual workflows are available to all users with the Tune Queries permission.

## Limitations

* Workbooks are currently not suited for optimizing queries invoked inside of functions
* Workbooks are currently not suited for testing different index choices by doing CREATE INDEX
* Data modification (DML) queries are not supported
* All query executions are limited to 60 seconds (this limit will be configurable in the future)
* The Collector Workflow requires the use of a function not owned by superuser
  * If your database provider does not allow creating separate roles, you cannot use the Collector Workflow

> [Learn how to navigate and use workbooks next](how-to-use-workbooks)

Reviewer 2: This link is not working well. I think we usually do something like `[](/docs/query-tuning/how-to-use-workbooks)`
